PHILIP'S MUSIC WRITER
---------------------

Copyright (c) 2025 Philip Hazel


DISCUSSION GROUP
----------------

There is a Google group mailing list for discussion of PMW issues. You can
access the archives and also subscribe or manage your subscription here:

https://groups.google.com/g/pmw_music


UNIX AND UNIX-LIKE SYSTEMS
--------------------------

I hope that this version of the program will run without problems on all Unix
and Unix-like systems. If you have downloaded and unpacked a release tarball,
installing PMW should just be a matter of typing:

  ./configure
  make
  make install

There are options for "./configure" that can be seen by running

  ./configure --help

In particular, note that you can add "--enable-pdf-default" to "./configure" in
order to make PDF the default output format. Otherwise the default output
format is PostScript.

If you have cloned the GitHub repository, you will need to run "autoconf"
first, in order to create the "configure" script.

You will probably need root privileges in order to run the install command,
unless your system gives you write access to the relevant directories.

There is a man page that lists the PMW command arguments. However, the main
documentation is provided only as a PDF file in the doc directory. The reason
for this is that music illustrations and characters from the music font appear
in the text.


OTHER SYSTEMS
-------------

PMW consists almost entirely of Standard C code, and so it should be possible
to compile it on any system with a Standard C compiler and library. There is
just one small code section that is Unix-dependent; this is the code that looks
for default options in the user's .pmwrc file. This code can be disabled by
defining -DNO_PMWRC when compiling the main.c module. If you are in an
environment where ./configure can be used, running it as

  ./configure --disable-pmwrc

will have the desired effect. To compile PMW entirely "by hand", first copy the
file src/config.h.in to src/config.h and then edit it to be your desired
configuration, according to the comments therein. Then compile all the .c files
in the src directory, omitting those that start "xml" unless you really are
interested in MusicXML input, and link the results to form the pmw binary.

Neil Killeen has kindly provided instructions for building PMW under Windows,
using the Cygwin environment. His notes are in the file Cygwin.txt in the doc
directory of the PMW distribution. Another PMW user has provided notes for
building in Apple Macintosh environments, available in the file MacOS.txt in
the doc directory.


HACKING
-------

Anyone interested in modifying the code should first read the file called 
doc/HACKNOTES.


Philip Hazel <Philip.Hazel [AT] gmail.com>
June 2025


LICENCE
-------

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along with
this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin
Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301  USA

--
